=== AUDIOFM - FM notes and instruments ===

The playable layer over the YM2151: eight FM channels, addressed by note
and instrument rather than by register.

What does work is SOUND, over VERA's PSG -- a different and much simpler
sound chip, which happens to live in VRAM and so needed no register
protocol at all. This page mattered most for a beginner's BASIC because
a child should be able to make a noise in one line, and none of the
register poking in HELP AUDIOYM is that line. SOUND is that line; the FM
voices below would make it a good one.

[x] SOUND voice,hz,volume - play a tone on one of VERA's 16 PSG voices.
    Voice 0-15, frequency in Hz, volume 0-63, both channels, a 50% pulse.
    It keeps sounding until silenced, so SOUND v,0,0 is how a note ends.
    NOT the YM2151: the PSG is simpler, it is VRAM rather than registers
    with a busy flag, and it was therefore the one that could be written
    first. The FM voices below are still to come.
[x] FMINIT - silence every channel and load one usable instrument on all
    eight. Without it the chip powers up with every operator at zero
    output level and total silence, which reads as "FM is broken" rather
    than "FM needs an instrument". The patch is not a good sound. It is
    an audible one.
[x] FMNOTE ch,note - key a note on. Semitones, twelve to the octave, 48
    near middle C. The chip does not take semitones: it wants an octave
    and a note code whose four-bit field SKIPS the values 3, 7, 11 and
    15, so the twelve codes are a table rather than arithmetic. Getting
    that wrong transposes everything above D by a semitone, which sounds
    like bad tuning rather than like a bug.
[x] FMOFF ch - key it off. A note held is a note that keeps playing.
[x] FMVOL ch,vol - channel volume 0-127, loudest at 127. The chip has no
    volume, only a per-operator attenuation where 0 is loudest, so this
    inverts; and it writes only the carriers, because writing a
    modulator would change the timbre instead of the loudness.
[x] FMINST ch,n - one of eight built-in instruments, 0 to 7.

    THEY ARE SERVICEABLE, NOT CURATED, and it is better to say so.
    Instrument 0 is exactly what FMINIT loads; the other seven were made
    by moving one thing at a time away from it - brighter, duller, slower
    to start, quicker to stop. Nothing here has been HEARD: this port has
    no way to listen, and giving a sound a name nobody has checked would
    be worse than admitting it. They differ from each other, which is the
    least an instrument set has to do before anyone can improve it.
[x] FMLOAD file$ - load an instrument bank from the card. Patches of 32
    bytes, up to eight, in the order FMINST numbers them; the layout is
    at the top of X816/audio_x816.s. A SHORTER FILE replaces only as many
    as it holds, so one instrument can be changed without shipping the
    other seven.
[x] FMPAN ch,lr - 1 left, 2 right, 3 both.
[x] PLAY s$ - a music string, the classic BASIC way:

        PLAY "T120 L4 O4 CDEFGAB > C"

    A-G a note, with # or + for a sharp and - for a flat; a number after
    it is its own length and a . makes it half again as long, so "C#8."
    is a dotted quaver C sharp. O sets the octave 0-7 and > and < step
    it. L sets the length notes take when they do not say - 1 whole, 4
    quarter, 8 quaver, and any other number too, so L3 and L6 give
    triplets. T is the tempo in quarter notes a minute, 32 to 255. R or
    P is a rest. Spaces and commas are ignored, so a string can be laid
    out to be read.

    IT BLOCKS, which is the classic behaviour and the honest one here: a
    note has to end, and the alternative is a VSYNC handler ageing the
    voices, which would make PLAY the one statement that keeps running
    after it has returned. Ctrl-C stops it between notes.

    It plays on FM channel 0 with whatever instrument that channel has,
    so FMINIT or FMINST 0,n has to have happened first. PLAY choosing an
    instrument for itself would overwrite one the program had chosen.

Timing was the thing to settle, and PLAY settles it by blocking - see
above for why, and HELP SYSTEM for what ONVSYNC would and would not buy
here. SOUND still has no length argument: a PSG voice sounds until it is
silenced, and the statement that ends it is SOUND v,0,0.

Volume shadowing. FMVOL's attenuation is applied when it is set, so a
later raw YMPOKE straight at a total-level register ($60-$7F) overrides
it until the next FMVOL or FMINST. Mixing the two layers needs that
documented, or it reads as a bug.
