=== JOYSTICK - game controllers ===

SNES pads, wired as a shift register on VIA #1 port A at $9F00-$9F0F.
The core carries snes_pad (X816_core rtl/x16_periph.sv), fed from the
MiSTer joystick input, so the hardware is there and answering -
durexForth reads it today. SuperBasic has no keyword for it yet.

[x] JOY(n) - read pad n, 0 to 3, as a button bitmap, 1 meaning held:

      bit 0 A       bit 4 up      bit 8  B
      bit 1 X       bit 5 down    bit 9  Y
      bit 2 select  bit 6 left    bit 10 left shoulder
      bit 3 start   bit 7 right   bit 11 right shoulder

    Pulse the latch on PA2 and every pad snapshots at once; sixteen
    clocks on PA3 shift them all out together, each on its own data line
    in PA7 down to PA4. The wire is active low and the top four bits are
    tied high, so the word is inverted on the way out: an absent pad
    reads as no buttons rather than as every button at once.

    Nothing here can be checked without a pad plugged in. The headless
    test shows the sixteen-bit shift completes and the inversion
    happens; it cannot show the bit order is right.
    (The pads are numbered 0 to 3. An earlier draft of this page said 1
    to 4, with pad 0 being the keyboard pretending to be a joystick as
    it is on the X16. There is nothing behind that here, so the four
    real pads got the four real numbers.)
[x] JOYHIT(n) - true when a pad actually answered the scan. An absent pad
    reads the same as a present pad with nothing pressed, so this is the
    only way to tell them apart. It works because an absent line floats
    high while a real pad keeps shifting out ZEROS once its sixteen bits
    have gone by - so eight more clocks say which happened.

    Unlike everything else here it does NOT scan. It reports the last
    scan, because "was that pad there" is a question about a reading
    already taken - and it is what JOYSCAN is for.
[x] JOYSCAN - sample all four pads in one pass. One scan reads all four
    whatever you asked for, since they shift out together, so this
    followed by four JOYHITs describes one instant rather than four.
[x] JOYX(n) / JOYY(n) - -1, 0 or 1. Down is positive, because the screen
    counts down.
[x] JOYFIRE(n) - true while A or B is held.

Buttons want to come back ACTIVE HIGH - a pressed button is a 1 - which
is the other way up from the wire. The layout durexForth settled on, and
the one to match:

    bit 0 RIGHT     bit 4 START     bit  8 R
    bit 1 LEFT      bit 5 SELECT    bit  9 L
    bit 2 DOWN      bit 6 Y         bit 10 X
    bit 3 UP        bit 7 B         bit 11 A

For a beginner's BASIC, that bitmap is the wrong first thing to offer,
which is why JOYX, JOYY and JOYFIRE exist above: "IF JOYX(0)=1" is one
line in a game loop where AND-ing a bit mask is three. Both layers are
here and the bitmap did not go away - a game that wants the shoulder
buttons still needs it.

Each of JOY, JOYX, JOYY and JOYFIRE takes its own scan, so reading all
three of a pad's axes costs three passes of the shift register. That is
nothing at human speed and it is honest at any speed - the alternative,
returning whatever the last scan saw, is a value that silently stops
changing.

THE PADS AND THE MOUSE SHARE ONE PORT, and this is the trap on this page.
The keyboard's I2C to the SMC runs on PA0/PA1 of the same VIA #1 port A
that the pads shift through. A scan must read-modify-write the direction
register and put those two pins back exactly as it found them; get it
wrong and an I2C transfer in flight is corrupted, which shows up as the
mouse or the keyboard misbehaving rather than as a joystick bug.
HELP MOUSE.

NUMLOCK switches keyboard/joystick mapping and SCRLK switches which
joystick, both handled below SuperBasic. A pad that disagrees with what
the keys are doing is probably one of those, not a fault in the read.
